As Jehovah's Witnesses, we truly love the Bible.
Why?
Because we know it is God's Word.
That's why we love reading it.
We love studying it.
And we love learning about its history.
When we pause for a moment
and reflect on the many efforts
that have been made through the centuries
to hinder and even stop the distribution of the Bible,
it becomes obvious that its author, Jehovah,
has been personally involved in preserving
and making known his precious Word.
This is very much in harmony with the thought
in Isaiah chapter 40 and verse 8.
The green grass dries up, the blossom withers,
but the Word of our God endures forever.
With that in mind, I'm happy to speak with you this month
on a theme that's very close to my heart.
The Word of our God endures forever.
The more we come to appreciate the value of God's Word,
the more we'll be moved to read it
and even more important to apply it in our lives.
Jehovah gave us an outstanding gift
when he inspired faithful men
to record his precious Word.
It's through the pages of God's Word
that we learn just how much God loves us.
Thus his Word contains guidance on how to live.
It outlines his purpose in creating us.
It gives us his precious promises
for life everlasting in peace and happiness.
No wonder the Apostle Paul was inspired to write
at 2 Timothy chapter 3 and verses 16 and 17.
All Scripture is inspired of God
and beneficial for teaching, for reproving,
for setting things straight,
for disciplining in righteousness
so that the man of God may be fully competent,
completely equipped for every good work.
Of course, Satan the Devil does not want people
to have access to these precious truths
from our Heavenly Father Jehovah.
It's no surprise that there have been many obstacles
to making the Bible available.
While Satan may not have been directly behind all of these,
he certainly had made use of them.
What are some of these obstacles?
And how have they been overcome?
Let's consider the first obstacle, language barriers.
The first 39 books of the Bible,
which are often called the Old Testament,
were written primarily in the Hebrew language.
These books were known by Hebrew-speaking servants of Jehovah.
However, as time went on,
particularly after the destruction of Babylon,
many Jews established communities
and other nations of the earth.
Many of these Jews spoke Greek.
They no longer used Hebrew.
That meant that many Jews no longer had access
to the Scriptures in a language they could understand.
Consider what had happened.
As Alexander the Great conquered more and more
of the then-known world,
Greek gradually became the common language of commerce
and government throughout his empire.
If the Bible was to be understood by the Jews
and by Jewish proselytes who were scattered
throughout this vast Greek-speaking territory,
it needed to be translated into Greek.
Beginning about the year 250 BCE,
the Hebrew Scriptures began to be translated into Greek.
In time, that Greek translation came to be known
as the Septuagint.
It was widely and frequently used
by the Christians in the first century who spoke Greek.
In fact, the writers of the Christian Greek Scriptures,
which is often called the New Testament,
frequently quoted directly from that translation.
So that obstacle had been overcome.
But there were many more language obstacles ahead.
As the Roman Empire began to flourish,
Latin replaced Greek as a common language.
Now, it was necessary to translate the Bible into Latin.
Some Latin translations of the Bible books began to appear.
But it was in the year 405 CE
that Jerome completed the definitive Latin translation
of the Bible.
It came to be known as the Latin Vulgate.
Jerome's translation would become the standard Bible
used by Christendom for the next nearly 1,000 years.
However, Latin soon became the language of the learned
and the elite, so the common people
could no longer understand the Bible's message.
During that long period,
there were sincere men that translated portions of the Bible
into some additional languages.
But these translations were, of course, all made by hand.
Such handwritten copies of the Bible were rare and expensive.
Therefore, access to the Bible in vernacular
or common languages was very limited.
But language was not the only obstacle
that threatened to prevent the distribution of God's Word.
Consider a second factor,
direct opposition to Bible translation
and distribution from religious leaders.
That opposition started to increase in 1229
when the local church council of Toulouse decreed.
We prohibit also that the laity
should be permitted to have the books
of the old or the New Testament.
In 1234, the council of Taragona decreed
no one should possess the books of the old
or the New Testament in the vernacular language.
And if anyone possesses them,
let him deliver them within eight days
from the promulgation of this decree
to the local bishop so that they may be burned.
Thus, during a very long period in history,
there was limited access to the Bible
in the languages spoken by common people.
But did that mean that the Word of God
would not continue to endure?
Neither language barriers nor opposition
from religious leaders could stop God's Word
from being made known.
Even in those dark times,
there were individuals who loved God's Word
and who worked hard to translate it
and to make it available to others.
Consider John Wickliffe and his followers
who were called the lawlers.
John Wickliffe and his associates
completed the translation of the Bible into English
about the year 1382.
They eagerly hand-copied the translation
and then traveled from village to village
reading the Bible to the common people.
Despite tremendous opposition from the church,
Wickliffe and his followers made the Bible available
to many honest-hearted people in the English language.
After Wickliffe died in 1384,
great opposition came to his followers.
Many had land and property confiscated.
Others were burned at the stake.
In response to the work of Wickliffe
and the lawlers, in 1408,
Thomas Airendel, Archbishop of Canterbury, declared,
we therefore decree and ordain
that no man shall hear after by his own authority
translate any text of the scripture into English
or any other tongue upon pain of greater excommunication.
Did such opposition wipe out efforts to translate
and make the Bible available?
Absolutely not.
The work of Wickliffe and his associates
stimulated interest in the Bible throughout England
and even as far as Central Europe.
Religious leaders were not able to silence
the Word of God.
In fact, within just a few decades after Wickliffe's death,
two factors led to a tremendous increase
in the availability of the Bible.
The first, about the year 1454,
was the development of printing with movable type.
This invention would in time allow for the printing
of large quantities of Bibles in many languages.
The second factor was the compiling and printing
of the Hebrew and Greek original language text
of the Holy Scriptures.
This allowed many translators to have access
to the original language texts
so that they then could produce high quality translations
in their own languages.
What was the result?
In the 1500s across Europe,
fresh translations were made and printed
in vernacular or common languages
including German, English, Italian, French, Dutch,
Czech, Danish, Swedish, Spanish, Slovenian,
and many others.
However, opposition continued.
Bible translators were frequently hounded
by the Inquisition and some translators
like William Tindale and John Rogers
were even put to death for their work.
Nonetheless, the Word of God continued to endure
and be made available to more and more language groups.
By the early 1800s,
Bible translation began to speed up.
Bible societies and intrepid translators began to work
in many parts of the earth
so that the Bible began to appear in languages
of Asia, Africa,
the Pacific Islands,
as well as in indigenous languages of the Americas.
From 1800 to 1899,
some portions of the Bible were translated
into some 400 languages
and from 1900 to 1950,
more than 500 languages were added.
Consider what has been accomplished
with the new world translation.
As of this month,
the new world translation has been produced in whole
or in part in 149 languages
with an additional 37 languages approved.
It's obvious that neither language barriers
nor opposition from religious leaders
was able to stop the distribution of God's Word.
Jehovah has protected it through the ages.
It's just as Psalm 12 and verse 6 and 7 says,
the sayings of Jehovah are pure.
They're like silver refined in an earth and furnace,
purified seven times.
You will guard them, O Jehovah.
You will protect each one of them
from this generation forever.
Yes, Jehovah has protected each one
of his precious sayings down through the ages,
but consider a third obstacle.
Although the Bible is now available in whole or in part
in almost 3,000 languages,
many people are no longer interested in reading it.
In our modern age,
people have become increasingly skeptical and irreligious.
Scientists have extolled the theory of evolution
and have made it appear intelligent
to adopt the existence of God.
At the same time,
secular philosophy has encouraged people
to make life decisions
according to what feels right to them.
What is the result?
A world where people are often guided
by their own selfish, fleshly desires.
Instead of leading to happiness,
many people are left feeling empty and dissatisfied.
How is this third obstacle overcome?
Around the world.
People are opening God's word the Bible
and reading it for themselves.
They're recognizing that its thoughts
are not simply human wisdom.
As they apply its principles in their lives,
they find contentment and joy.
They develop self-respect and dignity
from living according to the upright moral standards
outlined by our Creator.
As Psalm 119 verses 97 to 100 state,
how I do love your law,
I ponder over it all day long.
Your commandment makes me wiser than my enemies
because it is with me forever.
I have more insight than all my teachers
because I ponder over your reminders.
I act with more understanding than older men
because I observe your orders.
What a powerful proof that the Word of God
endures forever while the advice of human philosophers
is frequently flawed.
The Bible's counsel works.
If we apply it,
it can help us either to overcome
or to cope with any problem or situation that we may face.
What is more,
by explaining God's purpose for the future,
it gives us a solid hope.
This earth will be restored to the paradise
that it was when it was first created.
It will be filled with peace and righteousness.
What a wonderful gift Jehovah gave us through the Bible.
Yes, language barriers,
opposition from religious leaders
and even an increasingly irreligious world
cannot stop God's Word.
How can you be part of the evidence
that the Word of God endures forever?
Read it every day.
Study it.
Meditate on the deep thoughts that it contains.
And then apply those priceless teachings in your life.
In this way, not just on the printed page,
not just on the library shelf,
but in our minds,
in our own hearts,
in our own lives,
the Word of God will truly endure forever.